HOWTO.adoc, before:

= How to Write Good Documentation
include::include/config.adoc[]

This guide will attempt to help you avoid common documentation issues and help you get your point across as clearly as possible.

== Writing Style

=== Passive vs. Active Voice
When describing a documentation item, use a passive voice.

> `thing`: Does a lot of stuff.

When writing a warning, note, or similar, use an active voice. Speak _to_ the reader.

> Warning: Doing `this` will give you weird results. You should try to do `that` instead.

=== Abbreviations
When writing in _plain English_, **avoid abbreviations**. This also includes things like "&" instead of "and" and "@" instead of "at".

When writing _code examples_, **label abbreviations sufficiently**, either by self-labeling (match the abbreviation to the value) or with a comment.

Bad abbreviations:
[source,lua]
----
local a = VoxelManip(p1, p2) -- BAD: "a" is not a good choice for this variable
local emin, emax = a:read_from_map(p1, p2) -- BAD: What does the "e" mean?
----

Good abbreviations:
[source,lua]
----
local vm = VoxelManip(p1, p2) -- GOOD: Self-labeled
local emin, emax = vm:read_from_map(p1, p2) -- Emerged minimum and maximum positions (GOOD)
----

=== Grammar and Punctuation
* Always capitalize proper names and first letters in plain text.
** Capitalization in quotation marks is not required and usually discouraged. The goal of quotation in documentation is to mirror _exactly_.
* End all plain text with a period. This does not apply to code examples.
* Use the Oxford (or serial) comma. It helps reduce confusion.

=== Admonitions
The use of Admonitions (`NOTE:`, `TIP:`, `IMPORTANT:`, `CAUTION:`, and `WARNING:`) are useful for bringing the reader's attention to a specific idea or statement.
The use of these should generally follow these situation guidelines:


NOTE: This information is noteworthy. You will find it insightful to understand something.

TIP: This information is helpful. You will have an easier time doing something if you follow this.

IMPORTANT: This information is important. You really should know this or you may fail to understand something.

CAUTION: You should be careful with this, something bad might happen if you aren't.

WARNING: Something bad will happen if you do this, or don't do this. The game will crash, kittens will die, data will be lost, etc.

Use of Admonitions should be done when it is truly warranted.
Their over-use will add too much visual noise to the document, and may distract the reader away from the overall document text.

== Technical Detail
This is software documentation, so technical explanations are expected. But it is important to know when and how much to explain technical things.

=== Object Names
When referring to an object, use it's full name, the accepted shorthand, or it's highest generic term.

For example: An `ItemStack` should be referred to as "ItemStack", "stack", or "object", depending on the need. It should _not_ be referred to as "userdata" or "reference". Objects that have metatables should usually _not_ be referred to as "metatable".

=== Technical Jargon Saturation
Avoid too much technical detail for things that are unimportant, implied, or explained soon after.

BAD:

> The `ThisObject` metatable provides an OOP-like utility for processing the index mathematics of a `ThatObject`.

This has way too much implementation detail and unnecessary technical terms.

GOOD:

> The `ThisObject` object is a helper for handling `ThatObject` objects.

All we need to know is that it helps us handle `ThatObject`. What it actually does should be documented afterwards.

=== Internal Implementations
In general, describing internal implementations is unnecessary and confusing. Avoid it unless absolutely essential for understanding something.

This applies to meta implementations as well. For example, given the constructor `YourObject()`, do not document it as `YourObject.new(self, o)`. When describing the constructor, say "Creates and returns a new `YourObject` ". Do not go into unnecessary detail about what it does under the hood, such as `__index` management.

== Format
See link:templates/standard.adoc[standard template] for an example.

=== Includes
* `config.adoc`: Global doc configuration.
* `types.adoc`: Lua types formatted as `type-name` linked to the Lua PIL. Example: `{type-string}`. +
All types should link somewhere at some point (cross-reference or outside).
* `footer.adoc`: Footer for every documentation page.

=== Functions
----
 === function_name
 Description of the function.
 
 ==== Usage
 ----
 return_values = function_name(argument1, argument2)
 ----
 
 ==== Arguments
 [%autowidth, frame=none]
 |===
 | `argument1`  | `type` | Argument description.
 | `argument1` | `type` | Argument description.
 |===

 OR

 _None_
 
 ==== Returns
 [%autowidth, frame=none]
 |===
 | `return_name`  | `type` | Return value description.
 |===

 OR

 _None_
 
 .Example title
 ====
 [source,lua]
 ----
 -- Example code
 ----
 ====
----

=== Tables
----
* `property_name:` `type`
* `another_property:` `type`
 ** A description.
----

include::include/footer.adoc[]

Commit message:

HOWTO.adoc - specify formatting rules, apply them

HOWTO.adoc, after:

= How to Write Good Documentation
include::include/config.adoc[]

This guide will attempt to help you avoid common documentation issues and help you get your point across as clearly as possible.

== Writing Style

=== Passive vs. Active Voice
When describing a documentation item, use a passive voice.

> `thing`: Does a lot of stuff.

When writing a warning, note, or similar, use an active voice. Speak _to_ the reader.

> Warning: Doing `this` will give you weird results. You should try to do `that` instead.

=== Abbreviations
When writing in _plain English_, **avoid abbreviations**.
This also includes things like "&" instead of "and" and "@" instead of "at".

When writing _code examples_, **label abbreviations sufficiently**, either by self-labeling (match the abbreviation to the value) or with a comment.

Bad abbreviations:
[source,lua]
----
local a = VoxelManip(p1, p2) -- BAD: "a" is not a good choice for this variable
local emin, emax = a:read_from_map(p1, p2) -- BAD: What does the "e" mean?
----

Good abbreviations:
[source,lua]
----
local vm = VoxelManip(p1, p2) -- GOOD: Self-labeled
local emin, emax = vm:read_from_map(p1, p2) -- Emerged minimum and maximum positions (GOOD)
----

=== Grammar and Punctuation
* Always capitalize proper names and first letters in plain text.
** Capitalization in quotation marks is not required and usually discouraged. The goal of quotation in documentation is to mirror _exactly_.
* End all plain text with a period. This does not apply to code examples.
* Use the Oxford (or serial) comma. It helps reduce confusion.

=== Admonitions
The use of Admonitions (`NOTE:`, `TIP:`, `IMPORTANT:`, `CAUTION:`, and `WARNING:`) are useful for bringing the reader's attention to a specific idea or statement.
The use of these should generally follow these situation guidelines:


NOTE: This information is noteworthy. You will find it insightful to understand something.

TIP: This information is helpful. You will have an easier time doing something if you follow this.

IMPORTANT: This information is important. You really should know this or you may fail to understand something.

CAUTION: You should be careful with this, something bad might happen if you aren't.

WARNING: Something bad will happen if you do this, or don't do this. The game will crash, kittens will die, data will be lost, etc.

Use of Admonitions should be done when it is truly warranted.
Their over-use will add too much visual noise to the document, and may distract the reader away from the overall document text.

== Technical Detail
This is software documentation, so technical explanations are expected.
But it is important to know when and how much to explain technical things.

=== Object Names
When referring to an object, use it's full name, the accepted shorthand, or it's highest generic term.

For example: An `ItemStack` should be referred to as "ItemStack", "stack", or "object", depending on the need.
It should _not_ be referred to as "userdata" or "reference".
Objects that have metatables should usually _not_ be referred to as "metatable".

=== Technical Jargon Saturation
Avoid too much technical detail for things that are unimportant, implied, or explained soon after.

BAD:

> The `ThisObject` metatable provides an OOP-like utility for processing the index mathematics of a `ThatObject`.

This has way too much implementation detail and unnecessary technical terms.

GOOD:

> The `ThisObject` object is a helper for handling `ThatObject` objects.

All we need to know is that it helps us handle `ThatObject`.
What it actually does should be documented afterwards.

=== Internal Implementations
In general, describing internal implementations is unnecessary and confusing.
Avoid it unless absolutely essential for understanding something.

This applies to meta implementations as well.
For example, given the constructor `YourObject()`, do not document it as `YourObject.new(self, o)`.
When describing the constructor, say "Creates and returns a new `YourObject` ".
Do not go into unnecessary detail about what it does under the hood, such as `__index` management.

== Format
Noteworthy rules include:

* Use one sentence per line
* Define macros for long URLs, or those used multiple times
* Use delimitated example blocks for examples, but not for general function usage
* Long-winded tables should generally use one cell per line

See link:templates/standard.adoc[standard template] for an example.

=== Includes
* `config.adoc`: Global doc configuration.
* `types.adoc`: Lua types formatted as `type-name` linked to the Lua PIL. Example: `{type-string}`. +
All types should link somewhere at some point (cross-reference or outside).
* `footer.adoc`: Footer for every documentation page.

=== Functions
----
 === function_name
 Description of the function.
 
 ==== Usage
 ----
 return_values = function_name(argument1, argument2)
 ----
 
 ==== Arguments
 [%autowidth, frame=none]
 |===
 | `argument1`  | `type` | Argument description.
 | `argument1` | `type` | Argument description.
 |===

 OR

 _None_
 
 ==== Returns
 [%autowidth, frame=none]
 |===
 | `return_name`  | `type` | Return value description.
 |===

 OR

 _None_
 
 .Example title
 ====

 [source,lua]
 ----
 -- Example code
 ----

 ====
----

=== Tables
----
* `property_name:` `type`
* `another_property:` `type`
** A description.
----

include::include/footer.adoc[]
