doc/supported_file_formats.adoc, before:

= Supported File Formats
include::../include/config.adoc[]
:description: The file formats Minetest supports.
:keywords: fileformats

Minetest is able to read several types of file formats for use as assets in-game, each with varying usecase and support.

== Images
[grid="all"]
[options="header",stripes=even,cols="^.^,<.^,^.^,^.^,^.^"]
|===
| Format
^| General Usecase
| Can be written by Lua
| Can be read by Lua
| Lossless optimization

| PNG (`.png`)
| All-round good losslessly compressed image format.
| Yes (`minetest.encode_png()` ^(5.5+)^) (Third-party library ^(-5.4)^)
| Yes (Third-party library)
| http://optipng.sourceforge.net/[optipng] (use MTG's https://github.com/minetest/minetest_game/blob/master/utils/optimize_textures.sh[optimize_textures.sh] script for best result)

| JPEG (`.jpg .jpeg`)
| Lossily compressed images (e.g. photorealistic skyboxes and large textures)
| No
| No
.3+| N/A

| TGA (`.tga`)
| Easy to programmatically encode and decode due to being a simple image format
| Yes (Third-party library)
| No

| BMP (`.bmp`)
| Keeping IrrlichtMt running
| No
| No
|===

Prior to 5.5.0, Minetest used to be able to load PCX, PPM, PSD, PVR, DDS, WAL, LMP and RGB as part of Irrlicht's image loading capabilities. These are no longer supported and should be converted to a format that is still supported.

=== Third-party libraries for writing and/or reading
If you would like to write or read image files in Lua for a format the engine does not support, there are various libraries available as mods you can use.

==== PNG
===== Writing & Reading
* `modlib` (https://content.minetest.net/packages/LMD/modlib/[ContentDB], https://github.com/appgurueu/modlib[GitHub])

==== TGA
===== Writing
// The actual repository is https://github.com/EliasFleckenstein03/tga_encoder/ but it is outdated and doesn't contain compression support or performance improvements that exist in the MineClone2 source tree.
* `tga_encoder` (https://git.minetest.land/MineClone2/MineClone2/src/branch/master/mods/CORE/tga_encoder[MeseHub])

== Models
Minetest's support of various model formats can be seen as lacking. This is a side-effect of Minetest relying on the aging Irrlicht graphics engine which mostly only has support for old or obsolete model formats.

[grid="all"]
[options="header",stripes=even,cols="^.^,<.^,^.^,^.^,^.^,^.^,^.^,^.^"]
|===
| Format
^| General Usecase
| File Format
| Are static meshes supported?
| Are animated meshes supported?
| Implementation limitations
| Blender importer
| Blender exporter

| OBJ (`.obj`)
| Static meshes
| Text
| Yes
| No
| `.mtl` material files are not supported.
2+| Built-in

| Blitz3D model (`.b3d`)
| Animated meshes
| Binary
| Yes
| Yes
| N/A
.2+| None
| https://github.com/GreenXenith/io_scene_b3d[io_scene_b3d]

| DirectX 2.0 model (`.x`)
| Animated meshes in text format
| Binary/Text
| Yes
| Yes
| N/A
| https://github.com/minetest/io_scene_x[io_scene_x] (with caveats; see README.md)
|===

=== Third-party libraries for writing and/or reading
==== Blitz3D model
===== Reading
* `modlib` (https://content.minetest.net/packages/LMD/modlib/[ContentDB], https://github.com/appgurueu/modlib[GitHub])

Commit message:

More information about TGA and BMP usecases as proposed by erlehmann.

doc/supported_file_formats.adoc, after:

= Supported File Formats
include::../include/config.adoc[]
:description: The file formats Minetest supports.
:keywords: fileformats

Minetest is able to read several types of file formats for use as assets in-game, each with varying usecase and support.

== Images
[grid="all"]
[options="header",stripes=even,cols="^.^,<.^,^.^,^.^,^.^"]
|===
| Format
^| General Usecase
| Can be written by Lua
| Can be read by Lua
| Lossless optimization

| PNG (`.png`)
| All-round good losslessly compressed image format.
| Yes (`minetest.encode_png()` ^(5.5+)^) (Third-party library ^(-5.4)^)
| Yes (Third-party library)
| http://optipng.sourceforge.net/[optipng] (use MTG's https://github.com/minetest/minetest_game/blob/master/utils/optimize_textures.sh[optimize_textures.sh] script for best result)

| JPEG (`.jpg .jpeg`)
| Lossily compressed images (e.g. photorealistic skyboxes and large textures)
| No
| No
.3+| N/A

| TGA (`.tga`)
| Easy to programmatically encode and decode due to being a simple image format, and is to be preferred over BMP. Might be smaller than PNG at times due to a smaller file header.
| Yes (Third-party library)
| No

| BMP (`.bmp`)
| Another simple image format (but more complex than TGA). Kept due to IrrlichtMt depending on it internally.
| No
| No
|===

Prior to 5.5.0, Minetest used to be able to load PCX, PPM, PSD, PVR, DDS, WAL, LMP and RGB as part of Irrlicht's image loading capabilities. These are no longer supported and should be converted to a format that is still supported.

=== Third-party libraries for writing and/or reading
If you would like to write or read image files in Lua for a format the engine does not support, there are various libraries available as mods you can use.

==== PNG
===== Writing & Reading
* `modlib` (https://content.minetest.net/packages/LMD/modlib/[ContentDB], https://github.com/appgurueu/modlib[GitHub])

==== TGA
===== Writing
// The actual repository is https://github.com/EliasFleckenstein03/tga_encoder/ but it is outdated and doesn't contain compression support or performance improvements that exist in the MineClone2 source tree.
* `tga_encoder` (https://git.minetest.land/MineClone2/MineClone2/src/branch/master/mods/CORE/tga_encoder[MeseHub])

== Models
Minetest's support of various model formats can be seen as lacking. This is a side-effect of Minetest relying on the aging Irrlicht graphics engine which mostly only has support for old or obsolete model formats.

[grid="all"]
[options="header",stripes=even,cols="^.^,<.^,^.^,^.^,^.^,^.^,^.^,^.^"]
|===
| Format
^| General Usecase
| File Format
| Are static meshes supported?
| Are animated meshes supported?
| Implementation limitations
| Blender importer
| Blender exporter

| OBJ (`.obj`)
| Static meshes
| Text
| Yes
| No
| `.mtl` material files are not supported.
2+| Built-in

| Blitz3D model (`.b3d`)
| Animated meshes
| Binary
| Yes
| Yes
| N/A
.2+| None
| https://github.com/GreenXenith/io_scene_b3d[io_scene_b3d]

| DirectX 2.0 model (`.x`)
| Animated meshes in text format
| Binary/Text
| Yes
| Yes
| N/A
| https://github.com/minetest/io_scene_x[io_scene_x] (with caveats; see README.md)
|===

=== Third-party libraries for writing and/or reading
==== Blitz3D model
===== Reading
* `modlib` (https://content.minetest.net/packages/LMD/modlib/[ContentDB], https://github.com/appgurueu/modlib[GitHub])
