doc/classes/NodeMetaData.adoc, before:

= NodeMetaData

include::../include/config.adoc[]
include::../include/types.adoc[]
:description: Per-node persistent key-value store
:keywords: meta, data, metadata, node, storage, key, value, persistence

Node storage in Minetest is usually limited to

* A content ID (determining the node name),
* The `param1` unsigned byte (`0` - `255` both inclusive) which is usually reserved for lighting,
* The `param2` unsigned byte (`0` - `255` both inclusive) which can be used depending on `paramtype2`

NodeMetaData allows extending this with a per-world, per-in-world-node
persistent string key-value store implementing all methods of MetaData
allowing you to associate arbitrary data with any node.

Additionally, node metadata allows storing inventories for nodes like chests or furnaces.

== `minetest.get_meta(pos)`

Obtains a mutable NodeMetaData reference for the node at `pos`.

=== Arguments

[%autowidth, frame=none]
|===
| `pos` | Vector | Node position on the map; floats are rounded appropriately.
|===

=== Returns

[%autowidth, frame=none]
|===
| `meta` | NodeMetaData | Corresponding NodeMetaData reference
|===

== `minetest.find_nodes_with_meta(pos1, pos2)`

Searches a region for nodes with non-empty metadata.

=== Arguments

Cuboid corners are rounded properly if they are not integers.

[%autowidth, frame=none]
|===
| `pos1` | Vector | First corner of the cuboid region (inclusive)
| `pos2` | Vector | Second corner of the cuboid region (inclusive)
|===

=== Returns

[%autowidth, frame=none]
|===
| `positions` | List of Vector | List of integer positions of nodes that have non-empty meta
|===

== Special Fields

=== `formspec`

FormSpec to show when the node is interacted with using the "place/use" key (rightclick by default).

Has no effect if `on_rightclick` is defined in the node definition (see `minetest.register_node`).

The most notable advantage of this over calling
`minetest.show_formspec` in `on_rightclick` is clientside prediction:

The client can immediately show the FormSpec; the second approach requires the client to first inform
the server of the interaction, to which the server then responds with the FormSpec.
This takes one round-trip time (RTT).

The obvious disadvantage is that FormSpecs can't be dynamically generated in response to user interaction;
formspecs must be mostly static. To alleviate this, formspecs provide context-dependant placeholders
like `context` or `current_player` to refer to inventories (see FormSpec).

Another disadvantage is that plenty of redundant metadata - often a constant FormSpec - has to be stored with every node.
This metadata also has to be sent to clients. Minetest's mapblock compression should be able to compress duplicate substrings -
FormSpecs in this case - reasonably well though.

In terms of network traffic it depends: With meta, the FormSpec is "only" sent when the mapblock gets updated;
whereas the other approach resends the FormSpec every time the user interacts with the node.

=== `infotext`

Text to show when the node is pointed at (same as the `infotext` object property).

Long texts are line-wrapped, even longer texts are truncated.

== Methods

=== `:mark_as_private(keys)`

NodeMetaData is by default fully sent to clients;
the special `formspec` and `infotext` fields triggering clientside behavior
obviously need to be sent to clients to work.

All other fields do not need to be sent to clients
unless you want to explicitly support local mapsaving.

TIP: Mark all other fields as private to reduce traffic.

If you don't want clients to be able to see private NodeMetaData fields -
usually to prevent cheating - you must mark them as private.

NOTE: The private marking is tied to a key-value pair.
If the key-value pair is deleted, the private marking is deleted as well.
If the key-value pair is recreated, the private marking must be recreated as well.

NOTE: `to_table` and `from_table` do not keep track of which fields were marked as private.

==== Arguments

[%autowidth, frame=none]
|===
| `keys` | `{type-string}` or list of `{type-string}` | Either:
* A single key to mark as private, or
* A list of keys to mark as private
|===

=== `:get_inventory()`

==== Returns

[%autowidth, frame=none]
|===
| `inv` | Inventory | The inventory associated with the node
|===

=== `:to_table()`

Extends MetaData `:to_table()` by additionally adding an `inventory` field for
a table `{[listname] = list}` where `list` is a list of ItemStrings
(`""` for empty) with the same length as the size of the inventory list.

TIP: Use `table = assert(meta:to_table())` to error if the operation failed.

==== `:from_table(table)`

Extends MetaData `:from_table(table)` to add support for the `inventory` field.

Commit message:

Document `context` inv location availability

doc/classes/NodeMetaData.adoc, after:

= NodeMetaData

include::../include/config.adoc[]
include::../include/types.adoc[]
:description: Per-node persistent key-value store
:keywords: meta, data, metadata, node, storage, key, value, persistence

Node storage in Minetest is usually limited to

* A content ID (determining the node name),
* The `param1` unsigned byte (`0` - `255` both inclusive) which is usually reserved for lighting,
* The `param2` unsigned byte (`0` - `255` both inclusive) which can be used depending on `paramtype2`

NodeMetaData allows extending this with a per-world, per-in-world-node
persistent string key-value store implementing all methods of MetaData
allowing you to associate arbitrary data with any node.

Additionally, node metadata allows storing inventories for nodes like chests or furnaces.

== `minetest.get_meta(pos)`

Obtains a mutable NodeMetaData reference for the node at `pos`.

=== Arguments

[%autowidth, frame=none]
|===
| `pos` | Vector | Node position on the map; floats are rounded appropriately.
|===

=== Returns

[%autowidth, frame=none]
|===
| `meta` | NodeMetaData | Corresponding NodeMetaData reference
|===

== `minetest.find_nodes_with_meta(pos1, pos2)`

Searches a region for nodes with non-empty metadata.

=== Arguments

Cuboid corners are rounded properly if they are not integers.

[%autowidth, frame=none]
|===
| `pos1` | Vector | First corner of the cuboid region (inclusive)
| `pos2` | Vector | Second corner of the cuboid region (inclusive)
|===

=== Returns

[%autowidth, frame=none]
|===
| `positions` | List of Vector | List of integer positions of nodes that have non-empty meta
|===

== Special Fields

=== `formspec`

FormSpec to show when the node is interacted with using the "place/use" key (rightclick by default).

Has no effect if `on_rightclick` is defined in the node definition (see `minetest.register_node`).

The most notable advantage of this over calling
`minetest.show_formspec` in `on_rightclick` is clientside prediction:

The client can immediately show the FormSpec; the second approach requires the client to first inform
the server of the interaction, to which the server then responds with the FormSpec.
This takes one round-trip time (RTT).

The obvious disadvantage is that FormSpecs can't be dynamically generated in response to user interaction;
formspecs must be mostly static. To alleviate this, formspecs provide context-dependant placeholders
like the `context` or `current_player` inventory locations (see FormSpec).

IMPORTANT: The `context` inventory location can only be used in FormSpecs using the special `formspec` NodeMetaData field.
FormSpecs shown using `minetest.show_formspec` must use `nodemeta:<X>,<Y>,<Z>` to reference inventories instead.

Another disadvantage is that plenty of redundant metadata - often a constant FormSpec - has to be stored with every node.
This metadata also has to be sent to clients. Minetest's mapblock compression should be able to compress duplicate substrings -
FormSpecs in this case - reasonably well though.

In terms of network traffic it depends: With meta, the FormSpec is "only" sent when the mapblock gets updated;
whereas the other approach resends the FormSpec every time the user interacts with the node.

=== `infotext`

Text to show when the node is pointed at (same as the `infotext` object property).

Long texts are line-wrapped, even longer texts are truncated.

== Methods

=== `:mark_as_private(keys)`

NodeMetaData is by default fully sent to clients;
the special `formspec` and `infotext` fields triggering clientside behavior
obviously need to be sent to clients to work.

All other fields do not need to be sent to clients
unless you want to explicitly support local mapsaving.

TIP: Mark all other fields as private to reduce traffic.

If you don't want clients to be able to see private NodeMetaData fields -
usually to prevent cheating - you must mark them as private.

NOTE: The private marking is tied to a key-value pair.
If the key-value pair is deleted, the private marking is deleted as well.
If the key-value pair is recreated, the private marking must be recreated as well.

NOTE: `to_table` and `from_table` do not keep track of which fields were marked as private.

==== Arguments

[%autowidth, frame=none]
|===
| `keys` | `{type-string}` or list of `{type-string}` | Either:
* A single key to mark as private, or
* A list of keys to mark as private
|===

=== `:get_inventory()`

==== Returns

[%autowidth, frame=none]
|===
| `inv` | Inventory | The inventory associated with the node
|===

=== `:to_table()`

Extends MetaData `:to_table()` by additionally adding an `inventory` field for
a table `{[listname] = list}` where `list` is a list of ItemStrings
(`""` for empty) with the same length as the size of the inventory list.

TIP: Use `table = assert(meta:to_table())` to error if the operation failed.

==== `:from_table(table)`

Extends MetaData `:from_table(table)` to add support for the `inventory` field.
