templates/standard.adoc, before:

= Pomegranates
Author Minetest-Docs and Contributors 
v1.0, 2022-01-01
:description: A sample template for using AsciiDoc.
:keywords: sample
:toc:

// Using an image directory is a good idea, for relative paths!
:imagesdir: ../assets

// URL references:
:url-source: https://github.com/minetest/minetest_docs

This is a sample template of how a good AsciiDoc can be structured.
This pragraph describes the purpose of the document.
In this sample, an imaginary API
for producing pomegranates will be documented.

So without further ado, here is what we should see when we are done.

[#img-pomegranate]
.The Expected Result
image::pomegranate.png[Pomegranate]

== Pomegranate API Methods

=== `plant_tree(pos, name)`
* `pos`: `vector`
* `name`: `string`

Plants a tree of type `name` at `pos`
if `name` is a registered pomegranate tree.

.Planting A Tree
====

[source,lua]
----
plant_tree(vector.new(35, 42, 36), "regular")
----

====

=== `grow_tree(pos)`
* `pos`: `vector`

Grows the tree at `pos` if the node at `pos` is a valid pomegranate tree.

=== `spray_tree(pos, pesticide)`
* `pos`: `vector`
* `pesticide`: `string`

Sprays tree at `pos` with `pesticide` if it is a registered chemical.

== Source
You can contribute to the documentation at {url-source}[our GitHub repository]!

Commit message:

meta - Add configuration document to include

templates/standard.adoc, after:

= Pomegranates
include::../include/config.adoc[]
:description: A sample template for using AsciiDoc.
:keywords: sample

This is a sample template of how a good AsciiDoc can be structured.
This pragraph describes the purpose of the document.
In this sample, an imaginary API
for producing pomegranates will be documented.

So without further ado, here is what we should see when we are done.

[#img-pomegranate]
.The Expected Result
image::pomegranate.png[Pomegranate]

== Pomegranate API Methods

=== `plant_tree(pos, name)`
* `pos`: `vector`
* `name`: `string`

Plants a tree of type `name` at `pos`
if `name` is a registered pomegranate tree.

.Planting A Tree
====

[source,lua]
----
plant_tree(vector.new(35, 42, 36), "regular")
----

====

=== `grow_tree(pos)`
* `pos`: `vector`

Grows the tree at `pos` if the node at `pos` is a valid pomegranate tree.

=== `spray_tree(pos, pesticide)`
* `pos`: `vector`
* `pesticide`: `string`

Sprays tree at `pos` with `pesticide` if it is a registered chemical.

== Source
You can contribute to the documentation at {url-docs-repo}[our GitHub repository]!
